The workshop today is organised and taught by Open Cosmos. This UK startup space company aims at making space accessible to anyone, starting at universities. One of the methods they use to bring satellite technology to the world is by making satellites simple. They developed an online space mission design platform that allows users to develop and test mission characteristics in a matter of minutes. Once a basic mission profile has been determined, the software can be connected to an actual space-qualified satellite platform. This platform allows experiments, instruments and sensors to be physically integrated into the satellite, linked to the on-board computer and then connected to the online software to simulate the mission and measure the actual performance as if it were in space.

The workshops at the International Space University show the participants that with the Open Cosmos beeApp software and beeKit hardware, all this can be accomplished in just a few hours. Some years ago, such a satellite mission development and test cycle would take several weeks, if not many months. Today, the software needs just a short introduction to make participants familiar with the different screens and key mission parameters. They then put in practice their knowledge on a few test scenarios, before defining a mission for themselves. They can pick Earth Observation, telecommunication or science missions. The software handles it all.

After the introduction to the online software, workshop participants are provided with the easy-to-assemble beeKit satellite hardware. Although this is an assembly, integration and test kit, all structural and electronic components are space-graded and can withstand the forces of launch and the hostile environment of space. Assembling the satellite is definitely the fun part of the workshop. For most participants, this is the first time in their lives that they get to work on a real satellite platform. They experience first hand what the materials look like and what technical skills are required for the assembly. Starting with screwdrivers and Allen keys, finishing with umbilical cable connections, software drivers and satellite telemetry and command scripts.

The highlight of the workshop follows once everything is connected to the software, switching on the satellite onboard computer and the payload. For the final tasks, Open Cosmos provided a simulated payload that includes a camera and an internet-of-things signal receiver, allowing fun, but realistic exercises. Of course the best exercise is trying to taking a group selfie with the onboard Earth Observation camera.
